(J.S. Chahta ittíibihchootoomon afatìiba..\n)
(J.S Tell me about when the Choctaws used to fight.)

Chahta Albaamon ittííbin ohittibistóóbasáápin Albaamok ìmmáyyááchitoolo ohittibis- ohittibistóóbáápin ohayapkastáskat iishayóótik iisat chahtakok íísat íísaton iisatok nihtafíínaton óókan.
The Choctaws and the Alabamas started fighting and they fought and fought. The Alabamas were beating them; they fought for a long time and finally they overcame them. The choctaws were (holed up) in a house and the Alabamas were still there when daylight came.

Náások íksofóókon íksokáámin assaliikahchíísaamon máámóósin.\n
When they didn't see anything, one would go out, but 

Nákson hacháátok batlit batatlit maapí!kat sokáffit iswaliikahchootoha.\n
they (Alabamas) were standing close by and would hit them, knock them down, and scalp them and run off with them (scalps).

Mootok akkamíhchit akkáámin ho!oolistóóbaasin aboolin maatatanátkat ohittimataplichistóóbastík.\n
They did that and so then they (Choctaws) chased after them but they (Alabamas) turned off into the woods when they (Choctaws) tried to head them off (by a pincer movement), but they (Alabamas) disappeared and they couldn't see them because they had gone off. 

"Nakaa!aamon máámóósin ohikííchon nakaa!ahchootoha", hokahchootoolimpakha.\n
"When he's gone, he's gone", that's what they said then. 

Máámin maskat akastóóbaasáápok ohimálpíístaskat aaticháffáálit oola kanochilao maahotóónon naasiyon náásihatkahchcon naasisáhtik oíhaayok naasihatkabáánan ilommachiichok maatohnon a!!atok nakson Albaamok nákson iisaamon akkáámifan aayat tAAlwaamok talwatok onáámit aayat aayat 
This went on for a long time and the Choctaws got very tired. They picked out one person to improve the town and sent him out dressed up all in white. They sent him and he went to wherever the Alabamas were living and until he would arrive there, he kept on singing and singing as he went along, until he got there. That's the way he went along.

nakson o!aafóókon mak akkatóóyafookon Albaamok Albaamokok naho bihóótík stoo!óókat isto!aabiikat ihakcho yíkchoosootik ohintokáálichit obi ittaltaaloot tokaalichit akkamihchit akkamihchitik faykot ááyot a!!atok onáamit.
When he got to the Alabamas, they had weapons (bows and arrows or blow guns) and ran up to him, right up to him, and shot around him, real close to his ears and they shot between his two thighs, but he kept on doing what he was doing and he didn't stop. 

Nákson o!aamok yaknaa!iikastóóbaapok !opotliimok ááyastóóbáápok haatanatlit o!aafóókayok máámóósin akkat o!aamon akkat aayat akkamíhchit imakanochiik oola kanoochiimon yon tayyiha tóklohchon ohifaylilaak onkatóón ommin.
He kept on going and when he'd get to each one he'd talk and talk and go on by each one until, returning, he turned around and went back. Since they couldn't get out, that's what happened, they used to say.

Mootok ómmok o!aafóókan tayyihakon oifaylitáskan tayyihakon aatapo!óókáásit illitoha, homankahchoolimpakha.
Since he returned then, they let him have two women and so he had just gone to bed with the women when he died, that's what they always say.

Tayyiha tóklooyon oinfaytáskan ááyahchon ááyastóóbasáápok !oikat ila oola kanochihchót ááyahchommitok !oikat ila ilaskáámok máámóósin nok!ikiichachootohát illihchóót ommitoolo maskan akkáhtoha homankahchootoolimpakha.
Since they let him have the two women, that's why he went for so long. And he did all of that like that because he was doing it to make things better and if he makes things better for the town then they had promised to let him have two women. He came back after making things better for the town, but when he came back, he had been so scared (or anxious) that he died.

(J.S. Máámiimok nahoya iisan onokbáhkat íísafóókamok hoppolat anoostoha hokaakáámin háálolíhchoolikha.)
(J.S. Moreover, seems to me I heard them say that when they (Choctaws) were shut up in the house they had to have bowel movements in the house.)

Akkon íísan a!kat homa!atliista sahkofóókayok askaíkkostáskat íísahayomáálotik ohittahoppolat anoostoolo askáákahchókkota homa!atliista aatik assaliikahchíísááma máámóósin, oibiyá!!íhchon ommin.
There they were in the house for a long time and they couldn't do anything and they couldn't get out because they were so afraid. Anybody who would leave the house, they would always kill them.

Askaíkkofóókayok akkáhtokáhchon ohonkahchoolikha.
So that's what happened, they used to say.

(J.S. Umm, Maamimon naho Albaamok oola kanotohatáskan homankok naho chahta imalbínafan o!aachitooma maamin.)
(J.S. Hmm, then they said "Now what about the Alabama village improving" and went over to the Choctaw camp.)

Akkok Albaamayok nákson ittanowwatok pi!!on istitanowwahchok ommok paanifóót onkoomok akkaamiifon pi!!on á!kat istitanówwatók chahta imoolamok chahta imolóót ommitoolo.
Well at that time the Alabamas had gone someplace and they had gone in a boat on the creek. They were travelling by boat and came to what was supposedly a Choctaw camp and when they got to the Choctaw camp, they said "Since it's become a good town let's go see them", they said to one another.

O!achiifóókayok oola kanota oola kanotohat maatilhííchaskooko homankok; tanahlok amaakatok chahtahaakok náásooton imakanoochiikat stíísafookon hííchatáskat amahilkaskíí homankok;
And so they got out and went over there and the Choctaw seemed to be fixing things in the house and the Alabamas noticed it, so they said "Let's go!";

ontichitok pi!!akon oostá!kok ohamaakaton paanok táámin amáákastóóbáápin maahopo!oolilaatoolo homankok, paani filammihchok mintok tanton i!anik lawastáskan i!anibáááánahchon nááhohchon akkáhchon isfilkohkat stootalááhafookan ontííchit onkok aksobááchitók !opoolit wasahkatóóóón, hochakhíkkot ohikhííchot onkok !oyóóhkat !opooli !opoolit wasatkat máámosin ontibííkatoha hokáhchootookáhchon.
so they left and got in their boat and went. They were in a creek and kept going for a while and said, "They might follow us." They found a fork in the creek laying there; there was a lot of cane around there, there was cane everywhere along the branch off. So they branched off (the main creek) and floated, sitting there in the water. Then they heard them coming and they passed on by and when they had been gone for a long, long time and hadn't caught up with them or found them, they turned around and went back by them and so then they came on back. That's what they used to say.

Akkámóósin sómbaylilo.
That's all I know.



