(himaakaya naho historykáhchon !óókat ãfatlihabá.)
(Now I want you to tell me again about the history.)

ya aati íísaaya, ontííchímmoonama, nákson sáhmit ontííchiitóót chasobáykobi, máámin nákson iyaani nakson Albaamok maafaakon iyaani tállaakon mááfa pínhon tállaaka íísan íísat kolokbischobahchok tállaakaamon hayon íísahchootook.
These Indians that live here, when they first came, I don't know where they came from, but where there is the land the Alabamas used to live, that land lay far away, and they lived in a cave that was there, they use dto live in it.

akkon íísaamok nihtaya íístóók tamkáámon askahkat aachayon bok- askahkat oompat bitlihchóót íísahchootóót ommoolo. 
There they lived and in the daytime they stayed there and at night they came outside, they came out to eat and dance, that's the way they lived. 

sobaytákkón akkáhmit íísahchootóók tatkayok ilachiifóókok ittanowwafookayok aatik latkan holatkan hííchafookok hohííchafookok aatinaksáhchok íísa ommit onka oaalofookayok hichas baanaayok ilachitík oikhííchoyá!!istóóbaasáápok.
I don't know but that's how they say they lived, and when the white people came, when they were around there they saw the Indian's tracks (evidence of someone), and when they saw it they wondered and wanted to see what kind of people lived there, so they went there, but never did see them. 

nahon ohichas bannayok okiimiyon stinchokoolííchok wasatkatóón tamkafookayon askahkahchootohát tamkafookon o!achiifokok maafaakokn o!achitóón akkok náásiyok ischókkóóliisan akkon aatiyok ohaláykolaan hokastóóban.
They wanted to see them so they set out whiskey for them and left and when it was night they (the Indians) went over there, and whent hey got there something was set out there, and they (the leaders) told them not to touch it they said.

mooton aaticháffaakat náksáhchommit onkáálot maakon takáffok sáámóósin lasapkat hichatóón laskat hichatóón kanohchooliisan nááskanohchooliisan máámoosin maatímmayyaasin maalimitkatomóskan alíílamooliisan maatíískok ya nááskanóhchoolo isilka kanohchoolo kafookayon.
Then one Indian wondered what it was like, so therefore he dipped it, sipped a little of it to try it, and tasted it to try it, and it was good, it was something good, so then he swalled a little bit more and it was real good so he drank it again, and said "This is something real good to drink, oh, it is good".

aatimínta alahkakok oískok oiskofóókayok okiimotohatáskan homihchootohatáskan hoyámmok hoyammit anóókok stalaakaafookon tatkakok ilááchok oikhííchatoholin hoyámmok istaláákatáskan hopihlitooho.
The other people, the rest, drank it; when they drank it, it was whiskey and it was bitter, and they got drunk, all got drunk, and so they were there when the white people came, and they didn't see them because they were drunk, and since they were there, they got them. 

aatikon mooton hoichatoolo máámoosin aathómmayok íísahchommitóót imalahkamok mootoma stontihchootoomok ommolo posnaya.
Now they saw them, at that time they saw that it was the red people that were there, they were the kin folks then that came down here and they were ours. 

máámiimok alahkat íístoomok nákson askahkaafóókak ittánnowwat oostalbinaachit kánnaalit nákson stalbinaachit íísat ontííchistóóbaasáápok, táálon maatontiichitóót ommihchommolo maskat ontííchit ontííchit.
Now some of them that lived there somewhere they got out and went around and made camp, would move a little ways then camp somewhere, that's the way they did, I guess they came for a long time because, I guess they came toward this way and came and came. 

Loosiyanafayon maatilááchok mááfóótíísastóóbáápok.
They got to Louisiana and there they stayed for a long time

maatontichiimok maatontichiimok ya Texsifayon; Sabiinan oo!opoolok yon ilachiifookaya nákson aatiyok míntahayok iisabáánahchootoolo aati aatimíntahayok mootok ontííchit Tayla Kawntifayon Peach Tree Villageka---mááfon hománkahchoolo.
They came on over this way, they came on over this way and they got here to Texas; they crossed the Sabine River and when they came over here next there were different tribes living everywhere. The other Indian tribes then came to Tyler and Peach Tree Village--that's what they called that place there.

Akkon mááfon ilchikííkok oola tobaachok íísahchootook ommoolo ma- mafookama óhchaayon.
There they settled and made a little town and that's where they lived for a long time.

maastóóbasáápin ittibitilkayok tatkayok tatkayok ontichistáskat maatoo!opóólok ontííchistáskat nákson iyaani(n) hichaayok aalokóólihchoot ommitoolo.
That's been that way for a long time, and then the white man's war came on and so because of this the white people were coming and they passed through and kept coming, next they were all looking for land, I suppose and they gathered there together. 

Máskat !opóólit táála pínhon o!achiifookan--
The they passed through and when they got all the way over here--

Spaanihayok imihaanootook ómmok ohaakíílok ohacháápan tatkakon oyittibitok ómmooló máskat.
this land used to belong to the Mexicans, so they didn't like it and they were against the white's and that's why they fought with the whites.

Oittibifóókayon oittibifóókayon oittibaikáhmin--Santaana hokáhchootohá--mootomok óntihchonommin tatkayok akkon háálofookok intoo!ookayok !ooyóhkat Loosiyaanafakáálon amaakayok, tissanahóót stittanówwatok poskohóót stittanówwat stittanówwahchootook !ooyóhkat amáákafookayok Peach Trea Villagekahchon mááfaayon oo!abííkaamok.
They were fighting and fighting, they looked like they were going to fight and--Santa Ana is what they called him--he was the one that was coming and then when the white people heard about that, they ran away from them and turned back and went back to Louisiana; they took wagons and they took children with them and always had them with them and they turned around and when they went back and were on the way and would come to Peach Tree Village

akkon aathómmayok akkon íísafookan oolimpóót oostoimaháálot oostoimaháálo ommon náásot istoinkan waakimpisóót oinkáámok naasi oolimpasóót oinka hóppiiliimok poskoohayá!!ootík inkatipat fááylit aamaamáákabííkatoolomok amaakaamok Sabiinan oostoo!opóhlit akkon o!ááchiimá máámosin oo!opooliimá hosankíhchoolaatáskan. 
the Indians were there and when they came and asked for food they would give them something: they gave them milk, they gave them a little somethign to eat and they took it and finished feeding only the children and then they went on. When they went they crossed the Sabine because if they got there and then if they crossed over then they couldn't do anything to them;